{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf540
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\info
{\title Title should be in bold, sentence case with no full stop at the end}
{\author Bill Holmes}
{\*\company Ohio University}}\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12240\viewh15840\viewkind1
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs20 \cf0 Development of a graphic user interface for enhanced publication of scientific communication\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 First A Author\super \ulnone 1\nosupersub , Second Author\super 2,3\nosupersub , Third B Author\super 3\nosupersub \
\super 1\nosupersub  Department, University, Town, State Zipcode, USA\
\super 2\nosupersub  Department, University, Town, State, Postcode, UK\
\super 3\nosupersub  Company, Town, Province, Canada, Postcode\
\
E-mail: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:contact_author@my_email.com"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 contact_author@my_email.com}}\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 The main text of the abstract goes here; please use Times New Roman, 10 pt).  The text can be one or more paragraphs (without paragraph headings) or it can be a structured abstract as illustrated here.  For a structured abstract, please use paragraph headings in 
\b bold
\b0  with no colon at the end.  Use headings such as 
\b Background
\b0 , 
\b Methods
\b0 , 
\b Results
\b0 , 
\b Discussion
\b0  or something similar as needed and have the heading be by itself on a line.\
\
The title, author names, affiliations and e-mail should be formatted as indicated above.  Please do not abbreviate the first name of any authors (i.e., First A Author, \ul not\ulnone  FA Author).  \ul Underline\ulnone  the corresponding or contact author name.\
\
Use single spacing, type the text unjustified, without hyphenation and use hard returns only to end headings and paragraphs.  Do not change the page set-up which is Letter size with margins that are one inch on all sides.  The length of the main text should not be more than 400 words.  The total length including optional tables, figures, acknowledgements and references 
\b should fit on one page
\b0 .  Save as an RTF file.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Tables
\b0 \
You may optionally include a table.  Tables should be \ul numbered\ulnone  and \ul titled\ulnone , and should be cited in the text where appropriate.  Please format tables using the Table function in a word processing program to ensure that columns of data are kept aligned when the file is sent electronically.  Columns and rows of data should be made visibly distinct by ensuring the borders of each cell display as black lines.\
\

\b Figures\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 You may optionally include figures.  Figures should be \ul numbered\ulnone  and \ul titled\ulnone  with caption optional.  Do \ul not\ulnone  include the figure title or caption \ul within\ulnone  the figure itself. Figures should be cited in the text where appropriate.  Figures should be at least 300 dpi, preferably 600 dpi.  A vector image (like EPS) or a bitmap with 1200 px width is good.  Text in figures should be in Arial or Helvetica font.  Please make sure that any text in the figure is legible.  The figures should be embedded in the page.  Do not combine figures (except parts A and B, etc. of a single figure); that is, each numbered figure should be inserted separately.  \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Acknowledgements
\b0 \
Acknowledgements (use heading) may be included before the references (or at the end if there are no references)\
\

\b References\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 References should be cited consecutively as [1] and [2], etc. in the text and NOT as (Author et al. 2007).  Include only papers that have been published or are in press or are available through public e-print/preprint servers.  Incomplete or inaccurate citations will be deleted.  Journal abbreviations should follow MEDLINE standards.  Name all authors unless there are more than ten, in which case name the first ten followed by et al.  Page numbers should be given in full (e.g., 5672-5679, not 5672-9).  References should be listed following the styles, formatting and punctuation as indicated below.  We will link references automatically to PubMed whenever possible.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 References
\b0 \
1. Abbott LF, van Vreeswijk C: 
\b Asynchronous states in networks of pulse-coupled oscillators. 
\i\b0 Phys Rev E 
\i0 1993, 
\b 48:
\b0 1483-1490. 
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 2. Bower JM, Beeman D: 
\i The Book of Genesis, 2nd Edition.
\i0\b  
\b0 NewYork: Springer-Verlag; 1998.\
3. Ghazanfar AA, Maier JX, Hoffman KL, Logothetis NK: 
\b Multisensory integration of dynamic faces and voices in rhesus monkey auditory cortex. 
\i\b0 J Neurosci 
\i0 2005, 
\b 25(20):
\b0 5004-5012.\
4. 
\b EPFL Neocortical microcircuit database 
\b0 [http://microcircuit.epfl.ch]\
5. 
\b Petilla 2005 Convention 
\b0 [http://www.columbia.edu/cu/biologfaculty/yuste/petilla/petilla-webpages/Nomenclature/PetillaNomenclaturefinal.pdf]}