Fri Oct  8 13:52:11 CEST 2010

Job position: software engineer in neuroscience -- GENESIS 3

GENESIS 3 (http://genesis-sim.org/) is the first of a new generation
of simulators with the goal to transparantly interface with future
peer-review publication technologies and with current internet
technologies such as wikis, bloggers, facebook and youtube.  We are
currently looking for an accomplished enthusiastic and professional
software engineer to join the GENESIS 3 development team.

---------

GENESIS (the GEneral NEural SImulation System), is a software platform
that was originally developed during the 90s to support the
biologically realistic simulation of neural systems.  In this it
complements mental models in biology research with computational
models for simulation.  This technology greatly facilitates and
extends scientific communication and is expected to become a
fundamental tool for neuroscience and sciences and engineering in
general.

The GENESIS 3 (G-3) project is a backwards compatible and modular
reimplementation of the successful GENESIS 2 simulator.  G-3 is the
first of a new generation of simulators with the goal to transparantly
interface with current internet technologies such as wikis, bloggers,
facebook and youtube for the dissemination of model-based knowledge
and educational tutorials, and with future peer-review publication
technologies to further formalize model-based scientific
communication.

We are looking for an accomplished software engineer for the following
position:


* Position Description

 - Full-time software engineer.

 - full coverage health benefits.


* Required Technical and Personal Skills

 - A demonstrated proficiency and productivity in C programming.

 - Command shell and Makefile knowledge in a Unix/Linux environment.

 - Profound knowledge of the Python scripting language.

 - Become the technical owner of important modules of G-3.

 - Must be able to work and prioritize time independently without day to day supervision.

 - Understand the dynamics of a world-wide culturally diverse community.


* Desirable Technical Skills

 - Experience with large scale and multi-disciplinary software projects.

 - Experience with Perl and object-oriented programming languages.

 - Knowledge of parallel programming and numerical techniques.

 - Knowledge of hybrid debugging techniques.

 - Basic knowledge of security and trust models.

 - Background in neuroscience.


* Responsibilities

 - Implement efficient low-level code and high-level integration code.

 - Communicate with other team members.

 - Follow-up on documentation of implemented software.

 - Read scientific papers.

 - Learn about new internet technologies.


* Employer Info

 - The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA) is a stable and well organized environment for clinical and scientific research.

 - As an equal opportunity employer UTHSCSA gives jobs to positive colleagues of diverse culture and background.

 - San Antonio is one of the biggest cities in the United State, full of fun and culture.  It has many sports facilities and has some of the nicest museums in the United States (such as the well renowned McNay museum, http://www.mcnayart.org/).

