{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf540
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\title Title should be in bold, sentence case with no full stop at the end}
{\author Bill Holmes}
{\*\company Ohio University}}\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12240\viewh15840\viewkind1
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs20 \cf0 Realtime tuning and verification of compartmental cell models using RTXI and GENESIS\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Hugo Cornelis\super \ulnone 1\nosupersub , Allan D. Coop\super 2\nosupersub \
\super 1\nosupersub  Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA\
\super 2\nosupersub  Research Imaging Institute, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA\
\
E-mail: coop@
\f1\fs24 uthscsa.edu
\f0\fs20 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs24 \cf0 The GEneral NEural SImulation System (GENESIS) has recently been recon\uc0\u64257 gured to resolve problems resulting from the rapidly increasing complexity of neural modeling software. Modularization of GENESIS according to the Computational Biology Initiative (CBI\'96[1]) functional software architecture has provided important advantages by facilitating the easy integration of new simulator functionality while maintaining an open developer community. The complexity of individual software modules is greatly reduced from that of a complete simulation system, documentation is simplified when modules are independent, they can be more easily tested, added or removed, and the scope of a new module is clearly delineated. Unlike GENESIS versions 1 and 2, the modular construction of GENESIS-3 (G-3) is designed to greatly facilitate the development of new tools to support simulation-based education, collaboration, and model publication.\
\
The Real-Time eXperimental Interface (RTXI) is a mature modular dynamic clamp implementation growing out of previous work by Butera [2] and White [3] for hard realtime (RT) data acquisition.  RTXI is modular to the extent that user-supplied function-specific code models can be combined to build custom experimental protocols and interfaces. RTXI provides an event delivery system that allows these plug-ins to signal the occurrence of user-defined events amongst themselves as required.\
\
We report our efforts interfacing G-3 with RTXI to develop an integrated software platform that will greatly increase the power of dynamic clamp technology and in return deliver RT quantification and \'92tuning\'92 of the parameters of cell and tissue models.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\fs20 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 References
\b0 \
1. Cornelis H, Edwards M, Coop AD, Bower JM: 
\b The CBI architecture for computational simulation of realistic neurons and circuits in the GENESIS 3 software federation.
\b0  2008, 
\i BMC Neurosci.
\i0  
\b 9(S1)
\b0 :P88.
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 2. Butera Jr., RJ and Wilson, CG and Delnegro, CA and Smith, JC: 
\b A methodology for achieving high-speed rates for artificial conductance injection in electrically excitable biological cells.
\b0  2001, 
\i IEEE Trans. Biomed
\i0 . 
\i Eng
\i0 . 
\b 48
\b0 :1460-1470.\
3. Dorval AD, Christini DJ, White T: Real-time linux dynamic clamp: 
\b A fast and flexible way to construct virtual ion channels in living cells.
\b0  2001, 
\i Ann. Biomed. Eng
\i0 . 
\b 29
\b0 :897-907.}