{\rtf1\ansi\deff1\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset128 DejaVu Sans;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f5\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Tahoma;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;}
{\stylesheet{\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033\snext1 Normal;}
{\s2\sb240\sa120\keepn\rtlch\af4\afs28\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af1\langfe255\hich\f4\fs28\lang1033\loch\f4\fs28\lang1033\sbasedon1\snext3 Heading;}
{\s3\sa120\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033\sbasedon1\snext3 Body Text;}
{\s4\sa120\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033\sbasedon3\snext4 List;}
{\s5\sb120\sa120\rtlch\af5\afs24\lang255\ai\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\i\loch\fs24\lang1033\i\sbasedon1\snext5 caption;}
{\s6\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033\sbasedon1\snext6 Index;}
{\s7\sb120\sa120\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ai\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\i\loch\fs24\lang1033\i\sbasedon1\snext7 caption;}
}
{\info{\creatim\yr2010\mo2\dy3\hr11\min49}{\revtim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\comment StarWriter}{\vern3100}}\deftab709
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse195\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\pgdscnxt0 Standard;}}
{\*\pgdscno0}\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\sectd\sbknone\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
\pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\ql\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\ql\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 {\rtlch \ltrch\loch\f1\fs24\lang1033\i0\b0 The GEneral NEural SImulation System (GENESIS) has recently been recon\u64257\'3fgured to resolve problems resulting from the rapidly increasing complexity of neural modeling software. Modularization of GENESIS according to the Computational Biology Initiative (CBI\u8211\'3f
[1]) functional software architecture has provided important advantages by facilitating the easy integration of new simulator functionality and the maintaining of an open developer community. The complexity of individual software modules is greatly reduced
 from that of a complete simulation system, documentation is simplified when modules are independent, they can be more easily tested, added or removed, and the scope of a new module is clearly delineated. Unlike GENESIS versions 1 and 2, the modular constr
uction of GENESIS-3 (G-3) is designed to greatly facilitate the development of new tools to support simulation-based education, collaboration, and model publication.}
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 {\rtlch \ltrch\loch\f1\fs24\lang1033\i0\b0 The Real-Time eXperimental Interface (RTXI) is a mature modular dynamic clamp implementation growing out of previous work by Butera [4] and White [10] for hard RT data acquisition.  RTXI is modular to the extent that user-supplied function-specific code mo
dels can be combined to build custom experimental protocols and interfaces. RTXI provides an event delivery system that allows these plug-ins to signal the occurrence of user-defined events amongst themselves as required.}
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 {\rtlch \ltrch\loch\f1\fs24\lang1033\i0\b0 We report our efforts interfacing G-3 with RTXI to develop an integrated software platform that will greatly increase the power of dynamic clamp technology and in return deliver real-time (RT) quantification and \'81\'66tuning\'81\'66 of the parameters of cell and tissu
e models.}
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \ltrpar\s1\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\langfe255\hich\fs24\lang1033\loch\fs24\lang1033 
\par }